# Topic: CLI commands for User-Defined-Type definitions

* **Author**: Reshma Abdul Rahim (reshrahim)

## Topic Summary
<!-- A paragraph or two to summarize the topic area. Just define it in summary form so we all know what it is. -->
User-Defined Types enable Platform engineers to define and deploy their organization's custom services in Radius. More details around the feature, user scenarios and experience can be found [here](/architecture/2024-06-resource-extensibility-feature-spec.md). This document will focus on the CLI experience for creating and operating the User-Defined -Resource-Type definitions.

### Top level goals
<!-- At the most basic level, what are we trying to accomplish? -->
- Provide an intuitive and seamless experience for platform engineers to create, update, and delete User-Defined-Type definitions using the CLI.
- Ensure that the CLI experience is consistent with the other commands in Radius

### Non-goals (out of scope)
<!-- What are we explicitly not trying to accomplish? -->
- Other interfaces and experiences to interact with user defined resource type definitions and resources are out of scope for this document

## Key scenarios
<!-- List ~3-7 high level scenarios to clarify the value and point to how we will decompose this big area into component capabilities. We may ultimately have more than one level of scenario. -->
The key scenarios for UDTs are outlined [here](/architecture/2024-06-resource-extensibility-feature-spec.md). We will decompose these scenarios specific to the CLI experience.

### Scenario 1: Deb defines and deploys the internal messaging service using the CLI
<!-- One or two sentence summary -->
Deb, a platform engineer who wants to define and deploy their internal messaging service Plaid as a resource type in Radius. 

Before we start designing the experience, we need to understand the high level terminologies/concept that a user would interact with in the CLI experience.

| Terminology | Description | Example | 
|-------------|-------------|---------|
|Resource type | A service or technology that can be modeled as a resource | PostgreSQL or AWS S3 or Internal messaging service |
|Resource provider | Refers to a group of resource types under a common namespace. Resource providers are also entities that implement the group of resource types | Mycompany.Messaging or Applications.Core |
|Resource | An instance of a resource type | mydb or mybucket |

#### User Experience
Below is an illustrative example of how Deb would define and deploy the internal messaging service Plaid as a resource in Radius. 

1. Deb defines the schema for plaid messaging service in a `plaid.yaml` file. Note this schema definition is illustrative and may not be the final schema definition. This will evolve in [authoring experience feature spec](https://github.com/radius-project/design-notes/pull/74)

    ```yaml
    name: 'Mycompany.Messaging'
    types:
        'plaidService':
            apiVersions: 
                2024-10-01:
                    schema:
                        type: 'object'
                        properties: 
                            application:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Application name'
                            environment:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Environment name'
                            queueName:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Name of the queue'
                            host:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Hostname of the messaging service'        
                            port:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Port'
                            connectionString:
                                type: 'string'
                                description: 'Connection string to the messaging service' 
                        required: ['queueName', 'host', 'port', 'connectionString']
                    capabilities: ["Recipe"]           
    ....
    ```

1. Deb creates the resource type for the messaging service Plaid in Radius

    ```bash
    rad resource-type create -f plaid.yaml
    ```

2. Deb creates the resource instance for the messaging service Plaid

    ```json
    {
        "name": "myplaid",
        "type": "Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService",
        "properties": {
            "application": "myapp"
            "environment": "dev"
            "queueName": "myqueue"
            "host": "plaidxyz.mycompany.com"
            "port": "5672"
    ...
    }
    ```

    ```bash
    rad resource create -f myplaid.json
    ```
    The resource `myplaid` of type `Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService`is created and available for use.

4. Deb lists the resource types available in Radius

    ```bash
    rad resource-type list
    ```

    The list of resource types under the resource provider `Mycompany.Messaging` are displayed.

5. Deb makes changes to the resource type definition of `Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService`

    ```bash
    rad resource-type create -f plaid.yaml
    ```
    Note that the experience for handling breaking changes and non-breaking changes are detailed in the [authoring experience feature spec]((https://github.com/radius-project/design-notes/pull/74)

6. Deb wants to know if the resource-type is created successfully

    ```bash
    rad resource-type show Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService
    ```
    The details of the resource type `Mycompany.Messaging` are displayed.

7. Deb deletes a resource-type Plaid from the resource provider Mycompany.Messaging

    ```bash
    rad resource-type delete Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService
    Warning: `myapp` application has resources of type `Mycompany.Messaging/plaidResource` provisioned and running. Are you sure you want to delete the resource type plaidResource from the resource provider Mycompany.Messaging? (yes/no)
    ```
    The resource type `Mycompany.Messaging/plaidService` is deleted.


## Finalized set of commands

### rad resource-type

#### 1. rad resource-type create
Resource types are the entities that implement resource types such as 'Applications.Core/containers'. Each resource type can define multiple API versions, and each API version defines a schema that resource instances conform to. Inputs can be passed in as a file or as flags.

Create a resource type from a file 
    
```bash
rad resource-type create Mycompany.Messaging/plaidResource -f plaid.yaml
```

**Flags**
- `-f`, `--fom-file` : The file that contains the resource type definition

#### 2. rad resource-type list
Resource types are the entities that implement resource types such as 'Applications.Core/containers'. Users can list all the resource types available in the resource provider.

```bash
rad resource-type list --resource-provider Mycompany.Messaging
NAME            TYPE                STATE
plaidResource   Mycompany.Messaging Succeeded
resourceType2   Mycompany.Messaging Succeeded
```

#### 3. rad resource-type show
Resource types are the entities that implement resource types such as 'Applications.Core/containers'. Users can display the details of the resource types.

```bash
rad resource-type show Mycompany.Messaging/plaidResource
NAME            TYPE                STATE
plaidResource   Mycompany.Messaging Succeeded
```

#### 4. rad resource-type delete
Resource types are the entities that implement resource types such as 'Applications.Core/containers'. Users can delete a resource type.

```bash
rad resource-type delete Mycompany.Messaging/plaidResource
```

We decided to prompt the user with a warning message if there are resources provisioned and running under the resource type. If the user confirms deletion, Radius cleans up everything, deletes resources, types and resource providers.

### rad resource create
Resources are instances of resource types such as 'Applications.Core/containers'. Inputs can be passed in as a file or as flags.

Create a resource from a file 
    
```bash
rad resource create -f myplaid.json
```

**Flags**
- `-f`, `--fom-file` : The file that contains the resource properties

### rad resource-provider

#### 1. rad resource-provider create
Resource providers are entities that implement a group of resource types such as `Applications.Core`. Creating a resource provider involves creating new resource types that can be used in your applications. Inputs can be passed in as a file or as flags.

Create a resource provider from a file 
    
```bash
rad resource-provider create -f Mycompany.Messaging.yaml
Resource provider Mycompany.Messaging created successfully
```

**Flags**
- `-f`, `--fom-file` : The file that contains the resource provider definition

#### 2. rad resource-provider list
Resource providers are entities that implement a group of resource types such as `Applications.Core`. Users can list all the resource providers available in your tenant.

```bash
rad resource-provider list 
NAME   TYPE                                STATE
Mycompany.Messaging System.Resources/resourceProviders  Succeeded
```

#### 3. rad resource-provider show
Resource providers are entities that implement a group of resource types such as `Applications.Core`. User can display the details of the resource providers.

```bash
rad resource-provider show Mycompany.Messaging
NAME   TYPE                                STATE
Mycompany.Messaging System.Resources/resourceProviders  Succeeded
```

#### 4. rad resource-provider delete
Resource providers are entities that implement a group of resource types such as `Applications.Core`. Users can delete a resource provider.

```bash
rad resource-provider delete Mycompany.Messaging
```

We decided Radius can prompt the user with a warning message if there are resources provisioned and running under the resource provider. If the user confirms deletion, Radius cleans up everything, deletes resources, types and resource providers.

Option 2 : Radius can error out if there are resources provisioned and running under the resource provider. The user needs to delete the resources before deleting the resource provider.


## Commands/Features to consider for future iterations

1. Scaffold a sample resource type definition

    Deb uses the rad CLI to scaffold a `yaml` template definition for the internal messaging service `Plaid`

    ```bash
    rad resource-type init 
    ```
    This command will prompt the user to enter the resource type name, properties, and version. The user can enter the details and the resource type schema will be created. A sample `yaml` file is created in the application folder. If we enable TypeSpec, a sample `tsp` will be created and all the required dependencies will be created.

1. Support resource type creation from a URL

    Deb creates a resource type by passing the url of the schema definition

    ```bash
    rad resource-type create --url https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mycompany/plaid/main/plaid.yaml
    ```
    
1. Support multi-tenancy for resource providers

    Deb creates a resource provider that is scoped for tenant

    ```bash
    rad resource-provider create --name Mycompany.Messaging --tenant mytenant
    ```
    We need to flush out more details and scenarios on how the multi-tenancy support will work for resource providers and Radius in general.

## Key investments
<!-- List the features required to enable this scenario(s). -->

### Add support for resource type commands
Implement the following commands for resource types

- `rad resource-type create`
- `rad resource-type list`
- `rad resource-type show`
- `rad resource-type delete`

### Add support for resource provider commands
Implement the following commands for resource providers

- `rad resource-provider create`
- `rad resource-provider list`
- `rad resource-provider show`
- `rad resource-provider delete`

### Add support for resource commands
Implement the following commands for resource providers

- `rad resource create`

### Design Review notes and decisions

1. User journey to reflect the exact commands a user would use to define and deploy a resource type and resource instance
1. Support both `yaml` and `json` file formats for resource type definitions and resource instance definitions
1. Support for creating resource types from a URL need to be considered in future iterations because users would have these definitions in their repositories
1. For deleting a resource type or resource provider, we decided to do the following :
    1. API - Error out of if there are resources provisioned with resource type 
    2. CLI - Prompt the user with a warning message that there are resources provisioned with the resource type. If the user confirms deletion, API behavior is followed.

